---
layout: post
title:  "Old-but-gold Tech: The Keyboard"
date:   2024-04-08 17:53 +0700
categories: Old-but-gold Tech
---

This video is going to be about Old tech that still exists today. When we use our computer, we rarely pay attention to one very important part of it – The Keyboard. It is everywhere, our laptop, smartphones. Unless it breaks, you will probably never going to think twice about it. Well, let me help you with some questions. Why are they designed like that? And what’s with the weird QWERTY layout, why not ALPHABET layout, isn’t that more straightforward? And why is these keys named “return”, “shift” and “caps lock”? 
    To answer these questions, we have to look an old tech that preceeds our modern keyboard – the typewriter keyboard. Here’s an old but gold tech.

Before keyboard was being invented, pens were the most popular form of documenting our thoughts. However, the need for writing longer text while also being lazy humans ourselves means we need something that can write faster. 
Some initial ideas for a machine that can be typed into words were made into prototypes. However, most of them were not really friendly enough to use, and certainly were not ready to be adopted widely by an average Joe. This one you cannot see what you were typing. This one was just plainly confusing. This one was downright wacko.  It was not until 17-something that an American named Christopher Latham Sholes came up with what is considered the first Typewriter. Christopher, a print-guy who wanted to churn out more newspaper faster, took inspiration from one of the previous typewriters, which was mostly piano-shaped, to design a prototype that shaped like a piano. (Add story about a different iteration of early typewriters made by Sholes, adding the story about an investor who sticked with Sholes because the investor believed in the machine)   
Right before the deal with Remington went through, Sholes went to work creating a new prototype called Lalala , which features the QWERTY layout. Until this day, no sources were able to confirm the reasons behind this decision. However, one theory seems to prevail. The QWERTY layout is thought to be able to solve the jamming issue with the type hammer, which can jam when the types were being hit to quickly. This would mean that if you have letters that frequently go together in a word placed closed to each other on the type, it would make jamming more frequent and thus reduce typing speed. Whether or not this was Sholes’ intention, the QWERTY-layout typewriters were commissioned into mass production by Remington shortly after. And this was the beginning of nearly a century of typewriter’s ubiquitous presence as humans’ favorite writing machine, and so as the QWERTY keyboard.
The QWERTY keyboard name comes from the fact that the top letter row spells out QWERTY. However, depends on the language, this row can also spell AZERTY, mostly in France and showing keys that has distinctive features of its respective language, like the “dấu của chữ”  for Spanish and the “dấu của từ” Vietnamese. 

To answer the meaning behind some of the key’s iconic names, we have to understand how a typewriter works. Let’s check out the lab. This is a typewriter. Now, just in case some are wondering, no, you don’t need to plug it in to use. It functions completely by itself, by using mechanical interaction. To type, you need to feed a paper through a cylinder-shape thing called a carriage, then slide the carriage to the left so you can start typing from the left side of the paper. Remember this mechanism because it will help explain the name of a key later. Next, to type letters, you hit the type, and that will bring up a lever that transfer force to another thing called a hammer. This hammer, which has a stencil at the end, then hit the carriage surface called the platen and just before it hit the paper, a thing called ribbon was also raised to catch the hammer. This ribbon is basically a piece of cloth soaked in ink, which helps the hammer stamps letters on the paper. Quite brilliant right. That was only the simple part. 
Now, say you want to type capital letters? How would you do that? Do you create a whole new hammer. Well, there is actually a capital letter stencil already on the hammer. To type this, you will use a function called “Shift”. Why “Shift”. Well, because when you hit it. The carriage will shift up a notch, position itself and the ribbon up a notch, so that the part with the capital letter will hit the ribbon and the paper, not the lowercase letter. This shift upward will explain why the letter being produced with Shift is put in the upper level of each key, until this day. For those people who struggle to tell which letter will show when you hit Shift, just remember Shift means up, you’re welcome. 
If you release the Shift key, the carriage will move back to its normal position. Now if you’re typing multiple uppercase letters, holding down the Shift might be a bit of a drag, so on most typewriters, you can lock the carriage in place to type capital letters. Hence the Caps Lock. 
My second favorite key on the keyboard is probably the Tab key. Contrary to popular belief that this key is made to indent a sentence, it is actually used to type in tables. I quote this directly from Wikipedia “The word tab derives from the word tabulate, which means "to arrange data in a tabular, or table, form." When a person wanted to type a table (of numbers or text) on a typewriter, there was a lot of time-consuming and repetitive use of the space bar and backspace key. To simplify this, a horizontal bar was placed in the mechanism called the tabulator rack.”  Nowadays, with the ease of creating table on computer, the tab key losts its orginial function and was more popular for people to add an indent.

There was 2 more keys that are interesting to mention. The delete key, and the return key, or if it’s windows keyboard, the enter key. The name “return” might keeps the original function sentiment better. Why? Well, it comes from an action you need to do on the typewriter when you are typing until the end of the line and want to type a new line. To type in a new line, you need to manual hit a carriage return lever and slide it to the left, this will move the platen up a line, and you can actually adjust the space between the lines. When I first use Windows, I don’t get while the key is called Enter, when what it does was goes down to the beginning of a new line and not enter anywhere. So kudo to Apple.

Well, but then Apple screw up with the delete key. On a typewriter, there is no way to delete a word after it’s being typed. Instead, there was a key that when you hit it, it goes back one letter, so you use another key to overwrite the incorrect letter like the hyphen or the X key. In this respect, kudo to Microsoft for keeping it OG.

Until this point, some of you might have asked, why this particular silly QWERTY layout survived the test of time. Was there any other layout that can potentially help we type faster. Well! You smart. There was one potential candidate actually. QWERTY was not without its limitation, and so in 19-something, another layout was introduced, that after testing, proved superior to the QWERTY layout, producing more words per minutes than Sholes’ invention. So why did it not surpass the QWERTY. 

Well, there were 2 reasons, and all comes down to one word, inertia. It’s why people tend to use a particular brand of product for so long, even though there is alternative out there that is potentially better. But when you’re comfortable using one thing and the extra effort to research a new brand, test it to see if it’s for you proved too much of a hassle, then you are more likely to stick with the safe choice that has always worked well for you. This was a big reason why QWERTY hold its position. By the time another alternative was introduced, the sheer dominance of available keyboards in QWERTY layout and the extra training that you need to take to learn a whole new layout, while you had already spent a significant amount of time and effort learning and getting comfortable with the QWERTY keyboard, means that there was a huge inertia preventing you from switching.   By the time computers roll around, it makes sense to bring this layout to the new machine to make it more attractive for more people to switch. And that why this ancient tech still stick around with us until this day.

Well, I hope you’ve learned a thing or two about keyboard and appreciate a beautiful but underated invention called the QWERTY and the typewriter. This has been Tom, until next time with another old and gold tech. See ya!
